# Genetic Algorithm for 3D Bin Packing

## Overview

This genetic algorithm (GA) strategy is designed for solving a 3D bin packing problem with weight and priority constraints by optimizing package selection and packing. It encodes potential solutions as binary vectors, ensuring that a defined number of bits (representing packages) are active, to efficiently explore the solution space. The initial population is generated by prioritizing cost-efficient packages, while fitness evaluation considers both packing and discard costs. Crossover combines genetic traits from selected parents, guided by two different strategies to balance exploitation and exploration. Mutation introduces diversity by flipping bits with varying probabilities, using two distinct approaches to prevent premature convergence. Generational progression ensures high-quality solutions are retained or evolved, leading to optimized packing solutions through iterative refinement.



## How to run

To run the Genetic Algorithm and solve the 3D Bin Packing Problem, follow the steps below:

### Method 1: Modify the Configuration
Ensure that the `main.config` file is correctly set up by setting the `default_strategy` to `genetic_algorithm`. This will configure the optimizer to use the Genetic Algorithm approach.

### Method 2: Using the command line
```bash
python src/main.py -s genetic_algorithm -d -v
```

## genetic_3D_bin_packing.py

This file contains the main class for the Genetic Algorithm. This class is used to run the Genetic Algorithm.

## genetic_utils.py

This file contains the utility functions for the Genetic Algorithm. This class is used to run the Genetic Algorithm.

## genetic.config

This file contains the configuration for the Genetic Algorithm. This class is used to run the Genetic Algorithm.

Parameters that can be defined in the `genetic.config` file:

1. `number of generations` (`int`): The number of generations to run the Genetic Algorithm.<br  >
2. `number of individuals` (`int`): The number of individuals in the population.<br>
3. `mutation bracket size` (`int`): The size of the mutation bracket.<br>
4. `solver` (`dict`): The solver used for packing.<br>
5. `number of stable generations` (`int`): The number of stable generations.<br>
6. `probability of choosing elite gene` (`float`): The probability of choosing an elite gene.<br>
